---
title: Making a gas-tight automated door
author: theo
type: post
date: 2030-11-30T00:00:00+00:00
draft: true
url: /?p=359
categories:
  - Uncategorized

---
As part of a current project, I need a (small) gas-tight door which can be opened and closed automatically. This is not something that I was really able to find examples of online, and it actually took quite a few iterations to get right. So I thought I&#8217;d quickly write it up in in a blog post.

The basic idea was just to have a hinged door, with a cog on the door, connected via a number of gears to a motor such that the torque delivered by the motor is substantially increased. For simplicity I was keen to try to avoid needed to home the motor using an endstop sensor, and instead to mechanically home it by just forcing the stepper to try to close the door until it misses steps.

Some sort of gasket is needed to create a gas-tight seal. The easiest thing I found for this was [3mm neoprene foam][1]. This is available with an adhesive backing, although I happened to buy some without this, which I would attach with superglue.

When one designs the door one wants the closed state to have the neoprene somewhat compressed below 3mm &#8211; e.g. 2.8mm or 2.9mm. Getting a good seal all around the door was my biggest challenge. Initially I simply rotated the door at the hinge &#8211; but due to leverage this means it is exerting much more force on the bit of the gasket near the hinge than that at the outside. I would tend to find little gaps between the gasket and the door on the side far from the hinge. I found that pushing on the center of the door with even moderate force would close these gaps, so the solution was a design in which the force was transmitted from the center of the door. This turned out to be easy to achieve, with a modest change to the design having major effects. The final design takes advantage of the slight flexibility of the PLA to accomodate any imperfections.

The final design appears gas-tight (though this isn&#8217;t really a binary quality and I have assessed it only by checking for watertightness), and is reliable enough that after opening and closing constantly for two days (~17,000 openings/closings)

 [1]: https://uk.rs-online.com/web/c/abrasives-engineering-materials/rubber-sheets/neoprene-rubber-sheets/?searchTerm=Black%20Neoprene%20Rubber%20Sheets,%201m%20x%202m%20x%203mm&redirect-relevancy-data=636F3D3126696E3D4931384E53656172636847656E65726963266C753D656E266D6D3D6D61746368616C6C7061727469616C26706D3D5E2E2A2426706F3D31333326736E3D592673723D2673743D43415443485F414C4C5F44454641554C542673633D592677633D4E4F4E45267573743D426C61636B204E656F7072656E6520527562626572205368656574732C20316D207820326D207820336D6D267374613D426C61636B204E656F7072656E6520527562626572205368656574732C20316D207820326D207820336D6D26&r=f&searchHistory=%7B%22enabled%22:true%7D
